Britannica Money
Household Finance
Investing
Retirement
Companies
Biographies
Trading
Finance & the Economy
Household Finance
Understanding frugal fatigue and how to fight it
Your financial journey is a marathon, not a sprint.
Written byAllie Grace Garnett
Fact-checked byDavid Schepp
Updated: June 05, 2024
A young woman looks excitedly at pastries.
Tired of pinching pennies?
© Frazao Studio Latino––istock/Getty Images
Staying on top of how you spend each month can be draining, especially when you’re first starting out as a working adult. That tiresome feeling of fretting over whether you have enough in your bank account to cover your bills has a name: frugal fatigue.

Much like feeling burned out at work, frugal fatigue is a sense of exhaustion from the continual need to pinch your pennies to ensure your spending habits don’t cause you to overspend. Being responsible with your hard-earned cash isn’t easy—and it’s natural to make impulsive purchases or careless financial decisions on occasion.

Key Points
Frugal fatigue is feeling burned out by the need to keep a tight rein on your spending.
Recognizing this type of burnout is crucial to avoid it.
Smart budgeting is your first step to fighting frugal fatigue.
You can spend wisely and keep life interesting by understanding what frugal fatigue is, whether you’re experiencing it, and how to avoid it for the long haul.

What is frugal fatigue?
Frugal fatigue is a feeling of weariness or exhaustion that can set in after prolonged cost-cutting or strict budgeting. When you constantly limit your spending—whether to save money or repay debt—you may start to feel deprived or stressed. Continually denying yourself indulgences or nonessential purchases can leave you dissatisfied and may cause you to make money decisions you later regret.

Wondering if you’ve got frugal fatigue? Check for these symptoms:

Decreased financial motivation. Losing your drive to practice responsible money habits is a sign of frugal fatigue.
Procrastination on money tasks. Delaying necessary financial chores like budgeting or paying bills? You might be experiencing frugal burnout.
Impulse spending. If you find yourself succumbing to impulsive purchase decisions against your better judgment, that’s a major sign that you might have frugal fatigue.
Second-guessing financial decisions. Constantly questioning or doubting your financial choices is exhausting and can be a sign that you’re fatigued over money.
Emotional exhaustion. You might feel totally drained or overwhelmed at the thought of continuing to be frugal.
Frustration and irritability. Feeling especially irritable? That can arise from fatigue over tightly controlling your expenses over prolonged periods.
Feelings of deprivation. Got FOMO? A pervasive feeling of missing out can breed financial disgruntlement and discontent.
Boredom with your routine. If your frugal routine feels repetitive or restrictive, you might be on the path to frugal burnout.
Experiences vs. things
With a limited budget for discretionary spending, should you splurge on experiences or material things? You get to decide—but spending on experiences may generate more memories and lasting feelings of satisfaction. Plus, you get to post them on your social media channels!

Frugal fatigue isn’t inevitable, even if your budget is chronically tight. These seven tips can help you fight frugal fatigue.

1. Set clear and realistic money goals
Your first move is to define financial objectives that are clear and attainable. Budgeting frameworks like the 50-30-20 rule—which allocates 50% of your income to needs, 30% to wants, and 20% to savings and investing—may be useful for setting goals. Know why you’re being frugal to help maintain your focus.

2. Budget for what you love
If you’re following the 50-30-20 rule, you’ve got 30% of your income to spend on your passions. Do what you love! Pursue your hobbies, spend money on experiences, and generally enjoy your life. Strive for frugality with a touch of bougie to get that feeling of lasting balance.

3. Celebrate financial milestones
You’re working hard to achieve important money goals, and you deserve to celebrate your wins. Recognize and reward your financial milestones, perhaps with enjoyable treats that don’t break the bank. Celebrating your tangible progress is a meaningful way to stay on track.

4. Switch up your frugal routine
Bored with being frugal? You need a healthy dose of variety to keep things interesting. Try new, inexpensive activities and hobbies to keep your routine continually fresh. You may want to explore:

Outdoor activities
Learning a new skill
Free community events
Special events at parks, libraries, and museums
Do-it-yourself (DIY) projects
Experimental cooking at home
5. Practice gratitude for what you have
Look around—what in your life is already abundant? Regularly acknowledging and appreciating what you have is a powerful way to combat frugal fatigue. A mindset shift toward gratitude can yield an array of benefits, and may result in you having less desire for unnecessary spending.

6. Stay connected with friends
Your relationships are important. A sense of connectedness can help to dispel feelings of despair or fatigue. Stay connected with family, friends, and others who emotionally nourish you to help maintain your financial motivation. Sports activities, game nights, and potluck dinners are affordable activities that can foster meaningful connections.

7. Get more support if you need it
Still feeling down? Don’t be shy about getting more support. Online and in-person support groups dedicated to frugal living can provide helpful tips and enable you to learn from others’ experiences. You are not alone—and you may also find encouragement in providing support to others.

The bottom line
Frugal fatigue is real, and it’s crucial to avoid it to maintain your mental and financial health. Start by creating a budget, paying attention to your feelings, and ensuring you have fun along the way. If you’re taking these proactive measures and still struggling, consider reevaluating your financial goals. Managing your money responsibly is important, but your emotional well-being is what’s truly priceless.

Britannica Money Logo
About Us
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
© 2024 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.


Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information